All right so continuing on
with our utilisation of polymorphism to cast
and core methods.
Now we're using the same code,
the downcast example's class from the last video.
I want to start exploring what happens
if we start making mistakes
and specifically we start off by
reversing the cast types,
assuming you did that by mistake in code.
So what I want to do is change this code.
And the code I am looking for is this code here
which I'm gonna comment out briefly.
I comment that out so you can see it on the screen.
All right so there's the new code,
you can see the old commented out code,
and the new code that I pasted in.
So what we're doing is,
we're calling the specifically named methods first
by downcasting generically typed variables
to the object types,
but actually using the wrong cast.
So I've got a generic cat there,
calling the test dog method
and we're casting the cat object as a dog,
we're doing the opposite on line 50,
with the generic dog object,
casting it as a cat.
And then we're using the test animal overloaded methods,
downcasting generically typed variables to the object types.
Same deal there.
Generic dog casting as a cat
and generic cat casting as a dog.
So as you can see the compiler doesn't make a peep
about this mistake and we can compile the code,
you can see we've got no errors,
however running it throws an exception.
So we'll run that now.
And you can see we have in fact
got our class cast exception.
So the Java virtual machine's discovered out mistake
and threw that class cast exception.
So let's undo that code.
Okay, we're back to our original code again there now.
And now what I want to do
is just go to the top of the main method there.
I wanna paste in some code,
just under those first two animal declarations.
But obviously you can see these are mixed up declarations,
again there now.
And you can see that this time
the compiler caught this mix-up.
So it's a compiler error
fairly obviously to assign an object or a reference type
where there's no relationship.
But it's not a compiler error
to pass an object to a perimeter,
casting it incorrectly to the wrong type.
The point is that the compiler was able
to catch this error this time.
So let's remove those lines,
I'm just gonna undo the change, the paste,
to get back to the code before that.
All right and we've got a valid code again.
Let's now look at using casting in expressions.
What we need to do first
is add a simple method to our dog class.
Let's go back and do that.
We're gonna add that in.
Cause it's a very simple get dog string method there.
Then we need to go down to the bottom of our main method,
we're gonna paste some code down, down here.
So as you can see,
the code I've pasted there is an if statement
and it's downcasting a generic dog to a dog
and then wraps the downcast in parenthesis
to then access the get dog string
that we added to our dog class specifically.
So if we run this,
we should hopefully get matched at the bottom of our output.
And you can see we got matched,
so clearly that worked.
All right so finally for downcasting,
before we move on to upcasting,
I wanna show a downcast used on a return type from a method.
So I need to add a method to our downcast examples class.
Let's go ahead and do that, right to the bottom.
Very simple pass through method you can see
that accepts object O,
then returns O back as an object.
And let's go back up to our main method.
And paste in some code at the end of the main method.
You can see we're actually using a cat there,
calling the pass through method,
passing a generic cat,
casting as a cat,
and then using print cat method,
or invoking the print cat method.
We run that,
and we see we get the output "I am a cat".
All right, so that covers downcasting in assignments,
method calls, as well as expressions.
Let's now create a new class called
upcast examples in our project.
(typing)
Okay, there's the code for that.
So I can see first that we've got a tree-based class there,
with an instance variable on line 10,
and also a get tree string method.
Then moving down we've got a deciduous tree,
as well as a fruit tree,
and you can see that they're both extend trees,
so they're subclasses of the tree class,
they've both got a type,
and they're both overriding the get tree string method.
So moving down to our upcast class itself
in our main method,
you see that we're creating a specific trees there,
instances of,
we're upcasting using that on line 45,
basically upcasting a deciduous tree to its parent class,
we're printing out types using another upcast on line 51.
And finally upcasting
to pass an object as a parameter on line 54.
So if you run this code,
all right you can see the output
at the bottom of the screen there.
So the upcast to a print tree type is actually redundant,
you can see there,
it's telling us that casting apple tree to tree is redundant
and it didn't change the result if we hadn't upcasted.
The object pass is ultimately a fruit tree and
executing its get tree string method
executes the fruit tree's method
because that method is overridden.
All right so this video and its example code
demonstrated that casting can be used
to retype your object dynamically.
It allows to compiler to relax its type reference rules,
but if done incorrectly,
can cause runtime errors, as you saw.
Let's now move on to the next video,
where we're gonna review some additional interesting cases
for casting.
See you in the next video.